# Ruby SAML Migration Guide

## Upgrading from 1.x to 2.0.0

**IMPORTANT: Please read this section carefully as it contains breaking changes!**

### Before upgrading

Before attempting to upgrade to `2.0.0`:
- Upgrade your project to minimum Ruby 3.0, JRuby 9.4, or TruffleRuby 22.
- Upgrade RubySaml to `1.17.x`.
- In RubySaml `1.17.x`, if you were using the SHA-1 default behavior, change your settings to use SHA-256 as per below:

```ruby
# Set this in RubySaml 1.17.x, can be removed when upgrading to 2.0.0
settings.idp_cert_fingerprint_algorithm = XMLSecurity::Document::SHA256
settings.security[:signature_method] = XMLSecurity::Document::RSA_SHA256
settings.security[:digest_method] = XMLSecurity::Document::SHA256
```

### JRuby users should upgrade to JRuby 1.19 or later

JRuby users should upgrade to Nokogiri gem version 1.19 or later, to avoid 
[this Nokogiri issue affecting how XML is generated on JRuby](https://github.com/sparklemotion/nokogiri/pull/3456).
This issue is likely not critical for most IdPs, but since it is not tested, it is recommended to upgrade.

### Root "OneLogin" namespace changed to "RubySaml"

RubySaml version `2.0.0` changes the root namespace from `OneLogin::RubySaml::` to just `RubySaml::`.
Please remove `onelogin/` everywhere in your codebase. Aside from this namespace change,
the class names themselves have intentionally been kept the same.

Note that the project folder structure has also been updated accordingly. Notably, the directory
`lib/onelogin/schemas` is now `lib/ruby_saml/schemas`.

For backward compatibility, a module is defined at lib/ruby_saml.rb, so `RubySaml::` will still work
as before. This module will be removed in RubySaml version `3.0.0`.
```
unless defined?(::OneLogin)
    module OneLogin
        RubySaml = ::RubySaml
    end
end
```


### Deprecation and removal of "XMLSecurity" namespace

RubySaml version `2.0.0` deprecates the `::XMLSecurity` namespace and the following classes:

| Removed Class                 | Replacement Module & Method                                                      |
|-------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `XMLSecurity::BaseDocument`   | (none)                                                                           |
| `XMLSecurity::Document`       | `RubySaml::XML::DocumentSigner.sign_document`                                    |
| `XMLSecurity::SignedDocument` | Will be replaced with `RubySaml::XML::SignedDocumentValidator.validate_document` |

If your application does not already define the `XMLSecurity` namespace (e.g. from another gem),
these old classes will be shimmed to raise a deprecation warning or `NoMethodError` when used.

The new modules in the `RubySaml::XML` namespace provide similar functionality as the
deprecated classes, but are based on Nokogiri instead of REXML.

### Security: Change default hashing algorithm to SHA-256 (was SHA-1)

For security reasons, RubySaml version `2.0.0` uses SHA-256 as its default hashing algorithm everywhere
instead of the now-obsolete SHA-1. This affects:
- The default signature and digest algorithms used when generating SP metadata.
- The default signature algorithm used when generating SP messages such as AuthnRequests.
- The `:idp_cert_fingerprint` of IdP metadata as generated by `RubySaml::IdpMetadataParser`.

If you see any signature or fingerprint mismatch errors after upgrading to RubySaml `2.0.0`,
this change is likely the reason. To preserve the old insecure SHA-1 behavior *(not recommended)*,
you may set `RubySaml::Settings` as follows:

```ruby
# Preserve RubySaml 1.x insecure SHA-1 behavior
settings.idp_cert_fingerprint_algorithm = RubySaml::XML::SHA1
settings.security[:digest_method] = RubySaml::XML::SHA1
settings.security[:signature_method] = RubySaml::XML::RSA_SHA1
```

### Replacement of REXML with Nokogiri

RubySaml `1.x` used a combination of REXML and Nokogiri for XML parsing and generation.
In `2.0.0`, REXML has been replaced with Nokogiri. As a result, there are minor differences
in how XML is generated, including SAML requests and SP Metadata: 

1. All XML namespace declarations will be on the root node of the XML. Previously,
   some declarations such as `xmlns:ds` were done on child nodes.
2. The ordering of attributes on each node may be different.

These differences should not affect how the XML is parsed by various XML parsing libraries.
However, if you are strictly asserting that the generated XML is an exact string in your tests,
such tests may need to be adjusted accordingly.

### Custom Metadata Fields now use Nokogiri XML Builder

If you have added custom fields to your SP metadata generation by overriding
the `RubySaml::Metadata#add_extras` method, you will need to update your code
so that the first arg of the method is a
[Nokogiri::XML::Builder](https://nokogiri.org/rdoc/Nokogiri/XML/Builder.html)
object. Here is an example of the new format:

```ruby
class MyMetadata < RubySaml::Metadata
  private

  def add_extras(builder, _settings)
    builder.ContactPerson('contactType' => 'technical') do
      builder.GivenName { builder.text 'ACME SAML Team' }
      builder.EmailAddress { builder.text 'saml@acme.com' }
    end
  end
end
```

### Behavior change of double_quote_xml_attribute_values setting

RubySaml now always uses double quotes for attribute values when generating XML.
The `settings.double_quote_xml_attribute_values` parameter now always behaves as `true`,
and will be removed in RubySaml 3.0.0.

The reasons for this change are:
- RubySaml will use Nokogiri instead of REXML to generate XML. Nokogiri does not support
  generating XML with single quotes.
- Double-quoted XML attributes are more commonly used than single quotes. There are no known
  SAML clients which cannot support double-quoted XML.

### Removal of embed_sign setting

The deprecated `settings.security[:embed_sign]` parameter has been removed. If you were using it, please instead switch
to using both the `settings.idp_sso_service_binding` and `settings.idp_slo_service_binding` parameters as shown below.
(This new syntax is supported on version 1.13.0 and later.)

```ruby
# Replace settings.security[:embed_sign] = true with
settings.idp_sso_service_binding = :post
settings.idp_slo_service_binding = :post

# Replace settings.security[:embed_sign] = false with
settings.idp_sso_service_binding = :redirect
settings.idp_slo_service_binding = :redirect
```

For clarity, the default value of both parameters is `:redirect` if they are not set.

### Change to message UUID prefix customization

On SP-originated messages (`Authrequest`, `Logoutrequest`, `Logoutresponse`), RubySaml generates the
`uuid` (aliased to `request_id` / `response_id`) using the `_` character as a default prefix,
for example `_a1b3c5d7-9f1e-3d5c-7b1a-9f1e3d5c7b1a`. In RubySaml versions prior to `2.0.0`, it was
possible to change this default prefix by either `RubySaml::Utils.set_prefix` or by mutating
the `RubySaml::Utils::UUID_PREFIX` constant (which was what `.set_prefix` did.) In RubySaml `2.0.0`,
this prefix is now set using `settings.sp_uuid_prefix`:

```ruby
# Change the default prefix from `_` to `my_id_`
settings.sp_uuid_prefix = 'my_id_'

# Create the AuthNRequest message
request = RubySaml::Authrequest.new
request.create(settings)
request.uuid #=> "my_id_a1b3c5d7-9f1e-3d5c-7b1a-9f1e3d5c7b1a"
```

A side-effect of this change is that the `uuid` of the `Authrequest`, `Logoutrequest`, and `Logoutresponse`
classes now is `nil` until the `#create` method is called (previously, it was set in the initializer.)
After calling `#create` for the first time the `uuid` will not change, even if a `Settings` object with
a different `sp_uuid_prefix` is passed-in on subsequent calls.

### Deprecation of compression settings

The `settings.compress_request` and `settings.compress_response` parameters have been deprecated
and are no longer functional. They will be removed in RubySaml 3.0.0. Please remove `compress_request`
and `compress_response` everywhere within your project code.

The SAML SP request/response message compression behavior is now controlled automatically by the
`settings.idp_sso_service_binding` and `settings.idp_slo_service_binding` parameters respectively:
`HTTP-Redirect` will always use compression, while `HTTP-POST` will not. For clarity, here
"compression" is used to make redirect URLs which contain SAML messages be shorter. For POST messages,
compression may be achieved by enabling `Content-Encoding: gzip` on your webserver.

### Deprecation of IdP certificate fingerprint settings

The `settings.idp_cert_fingerprint` and `settings.idp_cert_fingerprint_algorithm` are deprecated
and will be removed in RubySaml 3.0.0. Please use `settings.idp_cert` or `settings.idp_cert_multi` instead.

The reasons for this deprecation are:
- Fingerprint cannot be used with HTTP-Redirect binding
- Fingerprint is theoretically susceptible to collision attacks.

### Other settings deprecations

The following parameters in `RubySaml::Settings` are deprecated and will be removed in RubySaml 3.0.0:

- `#issuer` is deprecated and replaced 1:1 by `#sp_entity_id`
- `#idp_sso_target_url` is deprecated and replaced 1:1 by `#idp_sso_service_url`
- `#idp_slo_target_url` is deprecated and replaced 1:1 by `#idp_slo_service_url`
- `#assertion_consumer_logout_service_url` is deprecated and replaced 1:1 by `#single_logout_service_url`
- `#assertion_consumer_logout_service_binding` is deprecated and replaced 1:1 by `#single_logout_service_binding`
- `#certificate_new` is deprecated and replaced by `#sp_cert_multi`. Refer to documentation as `#sp_cert_multi`
  has a different value type than `#certificate_new`.

### Minor changes to Util#format_cert and #format_private_key

Version `2.0.0` standardizes how RubySaml reads and formats certificate and private key
PEM strings. In general, version `2.0.0` is more permissive than `1.x`, and the changes
are not anticipated to affect most users. Please note the change affects parameters
such `#idp_cert` and `#certificate`, as well as the `RubySaml::Utils#format_cert`
and `#format_private_key` methods. Specifically:


| # | Input value                                          | RubySaml 2.0.0                                          | RubySaml 1.x              |
|---|------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| 1 | Input contains a bad (e.g. non-base64) PEM           | Skip PEM formatting                                     | Return a bad PEM          |
| 2 | Input contains `\r` character(s)                     | Strip out all `\r` character(s) and format as PEM       | Skip PEM formatting       |
| 3 | PEM header other than `CERTIFICATE` or `PRIVATE KEY` | Format if header ends in `CERTIFICATE` or `PRIVATE KEY` | Skip PEM formatting       |
| 4 | `#format_cert` given `PRIVATE KEY` (and vice-versa)  | Ignore PEMs of incorrect type                           | Return a bad PEM          |
| 5 | Text outside header/footer values                    | Strip out text outside header/footer values             | Skip PEM formatting       |
| 6 | Input non-ASCII characters                           | Ignore non-ASCII chars if they are outside the PEM      | Skip PEM formatting       |
| 7 | `#format_cert` input contains mix of good/bad certs  | Return only good cert PEMs (joined with `\n`)           | Return good and bad certs |

**Notes**
- Case 3: For example, `-----BEGIN TRUSTED X509 CERTIFICATE-----` is now
  considered a valid header as an input, but it will be formatted to
  `-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----` in the output. As a special case, in both `2.0.0`
  and 1.x, if `RSA PRIVATE KEY` is present in the input string, the `RSA` prefix will
  be preserved in the output.
- Case 5: When formatting multiple certificates in one string (i.e. a certificate chain),
  text present between the footer and header of two different certificates will also be
  stripped out.
- Case 7: If no valid certificates are found, the entire original string will be returned.

## Upgrading from 1.17.x to 1.18.0

Version `1.18.0` changes the way the toolkit validates SAML signatures. There is a new order
how validation happens in the toolkit and also the toolkit by default will check malformed doc
when parsing a SAML Message (`settings.check_malformed_doc`).

The SignedDocument class defined at xml_security.rb experienced several changes.
We don't expect compatibilty issues if you use the main methods offered by ruby-saml, but if
you use a fork or customized usage, it is possible that you will need to adapt your code.

## Upgrading from 1.12.x to 1.13.0

Version `1.13.0` adds `settings.idp_sso_service_binding` and `settings.idp_slo_service_binding`, and
deprecates `settings.security[:embed_sign]`. If specified, new binding parameters will be used in place of `:embed_sign`
to determine how to handle SAML message signing (`HTTP-POST` embeds signature and `HTTP-Redirect` does not.)

In addition, the `IdpMetadataParser#parse`, `#parse_to_hash` and `#parse_to_array` methods now retrieve
`idp_sso_service_binding` and `idp_slo_service_binding`.

Lastly, for convenience you may now use the Symbol aliases `:post` and `:redirect` for any `settings.*_binding` parameter.

## Upgrading from 1.11.x to 1.12.0

Version `1.12.0` adds support for gcm algorithm and
change/adds specific error messages for signature validations

`idp_sso_target_url` and `idp_slo_target_url` attributes of the Settings class deprecated
in favor of `idp_sso_service_url` and `idp_slo_service_url`. The `IdpMetadataParser#parse`,
`#parse_to_hash` and `#parse_to_array` methods now retrieve SSO URL and SLO URL endpoints with
`idp_sso_service_url` and `idp_slo_service_url` (previously `idp_sso_target_url` and
`idp_slo_target_url` respectively).

## Upgrading from 1.10.x to 1.11.0

Version `1.11.0` deprecates the use of `settings.issuer` in favor of `settings.sp_entity_id`.
There are two new security settings: `settings.security[:check_idp_cert_expiration]` and
`settings.security[:check_sp_cert_expiration]` (both false by default) that check if the
IdP or SP X.509 certificate has expired, respectively.

Version `1.10.2` includes the `valid_until` attribute in parsed IdP metadata.

Version `1.10.1` improves Ruby 1.8.7 support.

## Upgrading from 1.9.0 to 1.10.0

Version `1.10.0` improves IdpMetadataParser to allow parse multiple IDPSSODescriptor,
Add Subject support on AuthNRequest to allow SPs provide info to the IdP about the user
to be authenticated and updates the format_cert method to accept certs with /\x0d/

## Upgrading from 1.8.0 to 1.9.0

Version `1.9.0` better supports Ruby 2.4+ and JRuby 9.2.0.0. `Settings` initialization
now has a second parameter, `keep_security_settings` (default: false), which saves security
settings attributes that are not explicitly overridden, if set to true.

## Upgrading from 1.7.x to 1.8.0

On Version `1.8.0`, creating AuthRequests/LogoutRequests/LogoutResponses with nil RelayState
param will not generate a URL with an empty RelayState parameter anymore. It also changes
the invalid audience error message.

## Upgrading from 1.6.0 to 1.7.0

Version `1.7.0` is a recommended update for all Ruby SAML users as it includes a fix for
the [CVE-2017-11428](https://www.cvedetails.com/cve/CVE-2017-11428/) vulnerability.

## Upgrading from 1.5.0 to 1.6.0

Version `1.6.0` changes the preferred way to construct instances of `Logoutresponse` and
`SloLogoutrequest`. Previously the _SAMLResponse_, _RelayState_, and _SigAlg_ parameters
of these message types were provided via the initializer's `options[:get_params]` parameter.
Unfortunately this can result in incompatibility with other SAML implementations; signatures
are specified to be computed based on the _sender's_ URI-encoding of the message, which can
differ from that of Ruby SAML. In particular, Ruby SAML's URI-encoding does not match that
of Microsoft ADFS, so messages from ADFS can fail signature validation.

The new preferred way to provide _SAMLResponse_, _RelayState_, and _SigAlg_ is via the
`options[:raw_get_params]` parameter. For example:

```ruby
# In this example `query_params` is assumed to contain decoded query parameters,
# and `raw_query_params` is assumed to contain encoded query parameters as sent by the IDP.
settings = {
  settings.security[:signature_method] = XMLSecurity::Document::RSA_SHA1
  settings.soft = false
}
options = {
  get_params: {
    "Signature" => query_params["Signature"],
  },
  raw_get_params: {
    "SAMLRequest" => raw_query_params["SAMLRequest"],
    "SigAlg" => raw_query_params["SigAlg"],
    "RelayState" => raw_query_params["RelayState"],
  },
}
slo_logout_request = RubySaml::SloLogoutrequest.new(query_params["SAMLRequest"], settings, options)
raise "Invalid Logout Request" unless slo_logout_request.is_valid?
```

The old form is still supported for backward compatibility, but all Ruby SAML users
should prefer `options[:raw_get_params]` where possible to ensure compatibility with
other SAML implementations.

## Upgrading from 1.4.2 to 1.4.3

Version `1.4.3` introduces Recipient validation of SubjectConfirmation elements.
The 'Recipient' value is compared with the settings.assertion_consumer_service_url
value.

If you want to skip that validation, add the :skip_recipient_check option to the
initialize method of the Response object.

Parsing metadata that contains more than one certificate will propagate the
idp_cert_multi property rather than idp_cert. See [signature validation
section](#signature-validation) for details.

## Upgrading from 1.3.x to 1.4.x

Version `1.4.0` is a recommended update for all Ruby SAML users as it includes security improvements.

## Upgrading from 1.2.x to 1.3.x

Version `1.3.0` is a recommended update for all Ruby SAML users as it includes security fixes.
It adds security improvements in order to prevent Signature wrapping attacks.
[CVE-2016-5697](https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2016-5697)

## Upgrading from 1.1.x to 1.2.x

Version `1.2` adds IDP metadata parsing improvements, uuid deprecation in favor of SecureRandom,
refactor error handling and some minor improvements.

There is no compatibility issue detected.

For more details, please review [CHANGELOG.md](CHANGELOG.md).

## Upgrading from 1.0.x to 1.1.x

Version `1.1` adds some improvements on signature validation and solves some namespace conflicts.

## Upgrading from 0.9.x to 1.0.x

Version `1.0` is a recommended update for all Ruby SAML users as it includes security fixes.

Version `1.0` adds security improvements like entity expansion limitation, more SAML message validations, and other important improvements like decryption support.

### Important Changes

Please note the `get_idp_metadata` method raises an exception when it is not able to fetch the idp metadata, so review your integration if you are using this functionality.

## Upgrading from 0.8.x to 0.9.x

Version `0.9` adds many new features and improvements.

## Upgrading from 0.7.x to 0.8.x

Version `0.8.x` changes the namespace of the gem from `Saml` to `RubySaml`.  Please update your implementations of the gem accordingly.
